---
title: Development is Art
authors: zach
tags: [musings]
---

Just as a painter paints because he enjoys the act of applying
brush to canvas in order to create a reality out of an abstract
idea, I code because I enjoy the act of putting fingers to
keyboard to make a reality out of an abstract idea. Painters don’t
paint because it is incredibly profitable, and I don’t code for
just a paycheck. The money that I make from coding ensures that I
am able to practice the art of coding my own abstract ideas instead
of someone else's.

A day job as a developer will never make me happy nor make me feel
fulfilled; Only the ability to hack on my own projects can do
that. For this reason and this reason alone, I view all
development jobs as the same and compare on the sole criterion of
how much they enable my outside hacking. David Cronenberg once
said "The desire to be loved is really death when it comes to
art." I think that the same sentiment applies to development; If I
only code for what someone else wants, then I have died as a
hacker and have lost that part of my being forever.

I am a hacker. I am an artist. I use electrons, pixels, and
switches to transform the beauty of the baud into a physical
reality for my own enjoyment. I derive pleasure from making bits
cross wires and pixels blink on screens. I experience pain from
tedium and monotony. I don’t write code – I write art.