---
title: Genie - a filesystem tagger
authors: zach
tags: [development, swift]
---

[Genie](https://zachwick.github.io/genie) is a tool for assigning arbitrary tags to file paths, and then performing
search operations on those tags.

Like any person, I organize my files in a standard way on the machines that I use regularly:

```
~/Users/
├── Desktop
├── Documents
│   ├── Personal
│   ├── Work
├── Downloads
├── Documents
├── Repos
│   ├── APL
│   ├── C
│   ├── CPP
│   ├── Go
│   ├── Guile
│   ├── JS
.
.
.
```

This has its advantages, such as knowing where to go when looking for some particular project. This structure falls over
for projects with components in multiple languages however, such as a Swift API with a JS client. In that case, this
kind of file structure relies on naming conventions to indicate that two directory trees
at `Repos/Swift/projectx-server` and `Repos/JS/projectx-client` are part of the same project.

This is where `genie` comes in handy, because the Swift API's directory and the JS client's directory can be assigned
the same _tag_ of "projectX" and then use `genie search projectX` to see all of the filepaths that are associated with
that project's tag.

The other times where `genie` is useful is remembering every few months where exactly in a large codebase some change
needs to be made. This is where `genie` really shines in my day job where I seem to do many semi-regular drive-by pull
requests in the same area of the monorepo and can tag some deeply nested file with a self-evident tag.

`genie` is essentially a very small command line tool written in Swift that wraps some sqlite queries, but it serves its
purpose well.

You can read more about `genie` in the very [nascent docs](https://zachwick.github.io/genie).