---
title: Write better docs
authors: zach
tags: [docs]
---

<audio controls>
    <source src="/audio/write_better_docs_final.mp3" />
</audio>

That sentence might be a vague instruction coming down the chain-of-command to you. That sentence might something that
you aspire to do. In either case, that statement of "Write better docs." might be something that you’re actively working
to do. If you find yourself in this final group, then this text is for you.

You already know that the documentation that you create should be *useful*, but what does that mean in practice? Does it
mean that users can use your documentation to solve their implementation issues? Does documentation being *useful* mean
that your documentation helps users improve their business processes? Or does *useful* documentation only mean that its
existence is a positive value proposition by your sales counterparts?

*Useful* documentation can do all of these things and more.

Documentation is the force multiplier for marketing efforts when the product being marketed is a shovel or pick in a
gold rush. Good documentation can make a poorly marketed product sell decently and great documentation can augment great
marketing to best-in-class.

For businesses making software building blocks and selling them as these picks and shovels in the Big Tech/Silicon
Valley software-as-the-savior gold rush, best-in-class useful documentation rewards as both an economic return and as an
increase in the quality of the portion of the customer base that requires support.

Making useful documentation isn’t just getting rid of passive voice and putting in lots of screenshots. Making useful
documentation requires a full reframing of *documentation* as a product experience where the reader is taken on a
journey through the implementation and nuances of how your product applies to their scenario.

Documentation is usually treated as a hastily thrown together, constantly out-of-date content-island. Treating
documentation as an educational experience instead allows for the documentation experience to instill lasting
impressions in its participants. For readers of *useful* documentation, their personal educational motivations are
aligned with their immediate business needs and the spirit of the documentation. By teaching these participants how to
apply *your product* as the best possible solution to *their* particular business problem, your product's positive
associations with that user are increased and you have a perfect opportunity to educate them on the *why* of your
product's features. These active learners form an audience of highly motivated learners and are a captive audience for
marketing messages.

A user who understands why and how your product functions is educated on your product with declarative knowledge of what
your product is and procedural knowledge of how to use your product's features. Such knowledge transfer is the purpose
of the field of study of Instructional Design.

This means that if documentation experiences are treated as educational experiences, then they can be made more
impactful by analyzing them through the toolset and frameworks of the instructional design world.